\ifx\pdfminorversion\undefined
 \pdfoptionpdfminorversion=3
\else
 \pdfminorversion=3
\fi
\input texinfo

@setfilename vlink.texi
@settitle vlink manual
@setchapternewpage odd

@ifinfo
This is the manual for the portable multi-format linker vlink.

Copyright 1997-2016 Frank Wille
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title vlink portable multi-format linker
@author Frank Wille
@page
@end titlepage

@paragraphindent 0
@contents


@chapter General

@section Introduction
@command{vlink} is a portable linker which can be configured to support multiple
input and output file formats at once. It even allows to link input files
with a different format in a single run and generate the output file format
of your choice from it.

The linker supports linking with objects, object archives (static libraries)
and shared objects or libraries. It can generate an executable file with or
without additional information for dynamic linking, a shared object, or
a new object suitable for another linker pass.

Empty sections and other unused data are deleted to achieve a size-optimized
output.

@section Legal
@command{vlink} is freeware and part of the portable and retargetable ANSI C
compiler vbcc, copyright (c) 1995-2016 by Volker Barthelmann.

@command{vlink} may be freely redistributed as long as no modifications are
made and nothing is charged for it. Non-commercial usage is allowed
without any restrictions.

Every product or program derived directly from my source may not be
sold commercially without permission from the author.


@section Installation

@command{vlink} comes as a stand-alone program, so no further
installation is necessary.
To use @command{vlink} with @command{vbcc}, copy the binary to
@file{vbcc/bin}, following the installation instructions for
@command{vbcc}.


@chapter The Linker

@section Usage
@command{vlink} links the object and archive files given on the command line
into a new object file. The output object file is either an executable
program, a shared object suitable for loading at run-time, or an
object file that can once again be processed by @command{vlink}.

Object files and archives are processed in the order given on the command
line. Unlike other linkers you usually have to specify each library to link
against only once, as @command{vlink} is smart enough to figure out all dependencies.

The file format of an input object file is determined automatically
by the linker. The default output file format is compiled in
(see @option{-v}) and may be changed by @option{-b}. Optionally, the default
library search path can also be compiled in and is visible with
@option{-v} as well.

The number of output file formats included is configurable at compile time.

@section Supported file formats
The following file formats are supported:

@table @code

@item amigahunk
The AmigaDos hunk format for M68k. Requires AmigaOS 2.04 with
@option{-Rshort}.
No shared objects. Small data offset @code{0x7ffe}. Linker symbols:
@itemize @minus
  @item _DATA_BAS_ (PhxAss)
  @item _DATA_LEN_ (PhxAss)
  @item _BSS_LEN_ (PhxAss)
  @item _LinkerDB
  @item __BSSBAS (SASC/StormC)
  @item __BSSLEN (SASC/StormC)
  @item ___ctors (SASC/StormC)
  @item ___dtors (SASC/StormC)
  @item __DATA_BAS (DICE-C)
  @item __DATA_LEN (DICE-C)
  @item __BSS_LEN (DICE-C)
  @item __RESIDENT (DICE-C)
  @item ___machtype (GNU-gcc)
  @item ___text_size (GNU-gcc)
  @item ___data_size (GNU-gcc)
  @item ___bss_size (GNU-gcc)
@end itemize
Automatic constructor/destructor function tables:
@code{___ctors} and @code{___dtors} (will be mapped automatically to
@code{__CTOR_LIST__} and @code{__DTOR_LIST__}).
Supports @option{-Rstd} and @option{-Rshort}. @option{-hunkattr} can be
used to overwrite the memory flags of an input section.
This format was called "amigaos" in former @command{vlink} versions.

@item amigaehf
An extension of the AmigaDOS hunk format for the PowerPC,
32-bit, big endian, as introduced by Haage&Partner GmbH for WarpOS. No
executables (they are in @code{amigahunk} format) or shared objects.
The same linker symbols, constructors/destructors as under
@code{amigahunk} are supported. Additionally, @code{@@_name} symbols will
be created on demand (when referenced).
Supports @option{-Rstd}, @option{-Rshort} and @option{-hunkattr}.

@item amsdos
Absolute raw binary output, similar to rawbin2, but with a header
for Amstrad/Schneider CPC computers.

@item ataritos
Atari-ST TOS file format. Executables only at the moment. Symbol table
in extended DRI format. Symbols may be section- or start-based (option
@option{-tos-textbased}).
The internal linker script defines _LinkerDB for small
data and supports @command{vbcc}-style
constructor/destructor tables
in the data section (@code{__CTOR_LIST__} and @code{__DTOR_LIST__}).

@item cbmprg
Absolute raw binary output, similar to rawbin2, but with a header
for Commodore 8-bit computers (PET, VIC-20, 64, etc.).

@item elf32m68k
ELF (executable linkable format) for Motorola M68k, 32-bit,
big endian. Small data offset: @code{0x8000}. Linker symbols:
@code{_SDA_BASE_}. Automatic constructor/destructor function
tables will be placed into the sections @code{.ctors} and @code{.dtors}.
Supports @option{-Rstd} and @option{-Radd}.

@item elf32i386
ELF (executable linkable format) for Intel 386 and better,
32-bit, little endian. No small data. Automatic constructor/destructor
function tables will be placed into the sections
@code{.ctors} and @code{.dtors}.
Supports @option{-Rstd} and @option{-Radd}.

@item elf32aros
ELF i386 32-bit little endian like elf32i386, but generates
relocatable object files as executables. This format is
used for the AROS (Amiga Research OS) operating system.
Supports @option{-Rstd} and @option{-Radd}.

@item elf32arm
ELF (executable linkable format) for the ARM architecture.
32-bit, little endian. Small data offset: @code{0x1000}. Linker
Symbols: @code{_SDA_BASE_}. Automatic constructor/destructor
function tables will be placed into the sections @code{.ctors}
and @code{.dtors}. Supports @option{-Rstd} and @option{-Radd}.

@item elf32ppcbe
ELF (executable linkable format) for PowerPC, 32-bit,
big endian. Small data offset: @code{0x8000}. Linker symbols:
@code{_SDA_BASE_} and @code{_SDA2_BASE} (EABI only). Automatic
constructor/destructor function tables will be placed into the
sections @code{.ctors} and @code{.dtors}.

@item elf32powerup
ELF PowerPC 32-bit big endian like elf32ppcbe, but generates
relocatable object files as executables. This format is
used for the PowerUp kernel. The linker symbol @code{_LinkerDB} is
defined for @command{vbccppc}-compatibility.
Small data offset: @code{0x8000}.
This format was also called @code{elf32amiga} in former @command{vlink}
versions.

@item elf32morphos
Nearly identical to elf32powerup. Only difference is that
@code{.sdata} and @code{.sbss} sections will not be merged as the MorphOS
loader will take care of it. This format is used for MorphOS.

@item elf32amigaos
Identical to elf32ppcbe, but when doing dynamic linking it requires that
also all references from shared objects are resolved at link time. This
is due to a limitation of the AmigaOS4 dynamic link editor (elf.library).

@item elf32jag
ELF (executable linkable format) for Atari Jaguar RISC, 32-bit,
big endian. Small data offset: @code{0}. Linker symbols:
@code{_SDA_BASE_}. Automatic constructor/destructor function
tables will be placed into the sections @code{.ctors} and @code{.dtors}.
Supports @option{-Rstd} and @option{-Radd}.

@item elf64x86
ELF (executable linkable format) for the x86_64 architecture.
64-bit, little endian. No small data. Automatic constructor/destructor
function tables will be placed into the sections
@code{.ctors} and @code{.dtors}.
Supports @option{-Rstd} and @option{-Radd}.

@item a.out
Currently supported:
@itemize @minus
  @item aoutnull (Default with standard relocs and undefined endianess)
  @item aoutbsd68k (NetBSD/68k)
  @item aoutbsd68k4k (NetBSD/68k 4K page size)
  @item aoutsun010 (SunOS 68010 and AmigaOS/Atari 68000/010)
  @item aoutsun020 (SunOS 68020 and AmigaOS/Atari 68020-68060)
  @item aoutbsdi386 (NetBSD/i386)
  @item aoutpc386
  @item aoutmint (Embeds a.out in TOS format for Atari MiNT executables)
  @item aoutjaguar (M68k with special, word-swapped RISC relocations)
@end itemize
Small data offset: @code{0x8000} (unused).
Linker symbols:
@code{__GLOBAL_OFFSET_TABLE_}, @code{__PROCEDURE_LINKAGE_TABLE_},
@code{__DYNAMIC}.

@item vobj-le
@itemx vobj-be
VOBJ file format, generated by the @command{vasm} assembler. VOBJ is
a read-only object file format and is designed to support
any little- or big-endian architecture with all their
specific relocations.

@item rawbin1
Absolute raw binary file. The sections and base addresses
have to be specified by a linker script (option @option{-T}). Gaps
between sections are filled with 0-bytes. Without a linker
script, the raw binary will be relocated to base address 0.

@item rawbin2
Similar to rawbin1. The only difference is that a new output file will
be created, for each section which caused a gap larger than 15 bytes to
the previous section. The new file name will get the section's name
appended after a dot.

@item rawseg
Creates a raw binary file for each segment. Segments can be defined in a
@code{PHDR} block of the linker script. It defaults to text and data segments.
The segment names, their base address and length are written into the output
file while the binary files get their segment name appended to the original
file name.
When option @option{-q} (keep relocs) had been specified, then additional files
containing the relocation offsets are created. The first word in each file
defines the number of relocations.

@item srec19
@itemx srec28
@itemx srec37
Motorola S-Record format. No symbols. Output format only.
Without a linker script, the raw binary will be relocated to base address 0.

@item ihex
Intel Hex format. No symbols. Output format only.
Without a linker script, the raw binary will be relocated to base address 0.

@end table

@section Linker Options
@command{vlink} command template:
@example
  @command{vlink [-dhnqrstvwxMRSX] [-B linkmode] [-b targetname]
  [-baseoff offset] [-C constructor-type] [-da] [-dc] [-dp] [-EB] [-EL]
  [-e entrypoint] [-export-dynamic] [-f flavour] [-fixunnamed]
  [-F filename] [-hunkattr secname=value] [-interp path]
  [-L library-search-path] [-l library-specifier]
  [-minalign val] [-mrel] [-multibase] [-nostdlib]
  [-o filename] [-rpath path] [-sc] [-sd] [-shared] [-soname name]
  [-static] [-T filename] [-Ttext addr] [-textbaserel]
  [-tos-flags/fastload/fastram/private/global/super/readable]
  [-tos-textbased] [-u symbol] [-V version] [-y symbol] [-P symbol]
  input-files...}
@end example

Usually options and input file names can be mixed. Order of options may be
important (e.g. when specifying a library with @option{-l} or a search path
with @option{-L}).

The following options are supported:

@table @option

@item -Bdynamic
Specifies that linking against dynamic libraries can take
place. If a library specifier of the form @option{-lx} appears on
the command line, ld searches for a library of the from
@file{libx.so.n.m} (see the @option{-l} option) according to the search
rules in effect. If such a file can not be found a traditional archive
is looked for. This options can appear anywhere on the command line and is
complementary to @option{-Bstatic}.

@item -Bstatic
The counterpart of @option{-Bdynamic}. This option turns off dynamic
linking for all library specifiers until a @option{-Bdynamic} is once
again given. Any explicitly mentioned shared object encountered on the
command line while this option is in effect is flagged as an error.

@item -Bshareable
Instructs the linker to build a shared object from the object
files rather than a normal executable image.

@item -Bsymbolic
This option causes all symbolic references in the output to be
resolved in this link-edit session. The only remaining run-
time relocation requirements are base-relative relocations,
ie. translation with respect to the load address. Failure to
resolve any symbolic reference causes an error to be reported.

@item -Bforcearchive
Force all members of archives to be loaded, whether or not such
members contribute a definition to any plain object files.
Useful for making a shared library from an archive of PIC
objects without having to unpack the archive.

@item -b targetname
Specifies target file format for the output file. See
also "Supported file formats".

@item -baseoff offset
Defines section offset for base-relative relocations. The
default offset is target-dependant (e.g. @code{0x7ffe} for amigaos
and @code{0x8000} for elf32m68k).

@item -C constructor-type
Defines the type of constructor/destructor function names
to scan for. Valid types are:
@table @code
  @item gnu
    GNU style constructors
  @item vbcc
    vbcc style constructors: @code{__INIT[_<pri>]_<name> / __EXIT..}
  @item vbccelf
    vbcc style constructors: @code{_INIT[_<pri>]_<name> / _EXIT..}
  @item sasc
    SAS/C style constructors: @code{__STI[_<pri>]_<name> / __STD..}
@end table

@item -clr-adduscore
No longer add a preceding underscore for the symbols of the
following objects in the command line.

@item -clr-deluscore
No longer delete a preceding underscore for the symbols of the
following objects in the command line.

@item -d
@itemx -dc
@itemx -dp
Force allocation of common symbols, even when producing relocatable
output (@option{-r} option).

@item -da
Force allocation of address symbols (PowerOpen), even when producing
relocatable output (@option{-r} option).

@item -e entrypoint
Defines the entry point of an executable and may be either
a symbol or an absolute address. The linker will set the
entry point by trying each of the following methods in order,
stopping when the first succeeds:
@enumerate
  @item -e option
  @item @code{ENTRY()} command in a linker script
  @item value of the symbol @code{_start}, if defined
  @item start of the first executable code section
  @item address 0
@end enumerate

@item -EB
Presets big-endian mode for reading input and writing output.

@item -EL
Presets little-endian mode for reading input and writing output.

@item -export-dynamic
Put all global symbols of the output file into the dynamic symbol table,
making them visible for shared objects loaded on demand (e.g. by
@code{dlopen()}).

@item -f flavour
Adds a library-flavour. All flavours are cumulatively
appended to each library search-path, whenever a library
 was specified with @option{-l}.
Example: One search path and two flavours will search in:
@enumerate
  @item @file{<lib-path>},
  @item @file{<lib-path>/<flavour1>} and
  @item @file{<lib-path>/<flavour1>/<flavour2>}
@end enumerate

@item -F filename
A list of object file names is read from the specified file.
Useful, if the number of objects exceeds the length of the command line.

@item -fixunnamed
All unnamed sections will get a default name according to
their section type (@code{.text}, @code{.data} and @code{.bss}).

@item -h
Prints a short help text.

@item -hunkattr secname=value
Overwrite the memory attributes of all input sections named @code{secname}
with @code{value}. For example allocate the @code{DATA} section in
Chip-RAM: @code{-hunkattr DATA=2}. Extended memory attributes are supported.
Only valid for AmigaDOS hunk format and WarpOS EHF.

@item -interp interpreter-path
Defines the name of the interpreter, which is usually the
dynamic linker for dynamically linked ELF executables.
Defaults to @file{/usr/lib/ld.so.1}.

@item -L library-search-path
Add path to the list of directories to search for libraries
specified with the @option{-l} option. When a default search path
was compiled in (see @option{-v}), then it is searched last.

@item -l library-specifier
This option specifies a library to be considered for inclusion
in the output. If the @option{-Bdynamic} option is in effect, a shared
library of the form @file{lib<spec>.so.m.n} (where @code{m} is the
major, and @code{n} is the minor version number, respectively) is searched
for first. The library with the highest version found in the
search path is selected. If no shared library is found or
the @option{-Bstatic} option is in effect, an archive of the form
@file{lib<spec>.a} is looked for in the library search path.
For @code{amigaos}/@code{amigaehf} file formats, the libraries are
called @file{<spec>.lib}.

@item -M
Produce output about the mapping of sections of the input
files and the values assigned to symbols in the output file.

@item -minalign alignment
Set a minimum alignment (number of bits which have to be zero) for all
imported sections. The specified @code{alignment} value will only take
effect when higher than the section's current alignment. It defaults to 0.

@item -mrel
Automatically merge sections, when there are PC-relative references
between them.

@item -multibase
The default behaviour of @command{vlink} is to merge all sections
which are accessed base-relative. This guarantees a single
small data section, which can be accessed through a base
register.
If this is not desired - maybe you have several base registers and
small data sections - you can disable this behaviour by specifying
@option{-multibase}.

@item -n
No page alignment of sections or segments in the final
executable (@code{NMAGIC}).

@item -nostdlib
Ignore default library search path, if one was compiled in.

@item -o filename
Specifies the name of the output file. Defaults to @file{a.out}.

@item -osec
Output each section as an individual file. The file name given with
@option{-o} will be ignored. Only available for some target formats:
rawbin1, rawbin2, amsdos, cbmprg.

@item -osec=basename
Works like @option{-osec}, but each output file name will be preceded
by @file{"basename."}.

@item -P symbol
Protect a symbol from stripping. This doesn't work for all targets!

@item -q
Emit relocations, even for absolute executables.

@item -R format
Sets the relocation table format. Usually there is no need
to change the default format defined by the target (@option{-b} option).
Valid format strings are:
@table @code
  @item std
    standard format with addends in the code
  @item add
    addends are stored in the relocation table
  @item short
    relocation table with short offsets (e.g. 16 bit)
@end table
Note that most targets only support one or two of those formats.

@item -r
Produce relocatable object file, suitable for another linker pass.

@item -rpath library-search-path
Add a directory to the runtime library search path. This is used
when linking an ELF executable with shared objects. All @option{-rpath}
arguments are concatenated and passed to the runtime linker,
which uses them to locate shared objects at runtime.

@item -S
Strip all debugger symbols from the output.

@item -s
Strip all symbols from the output.

@item -sc
Merge all code sections to a single code section (small code).

@item -sd
Merge all data and bss sections to a single data-bss section (small data).

@item -set-adduscore
Start adding a preceding underscore for the symbols of the
following objects in the command line.

@item -set-deluscore
Start deleting a preceding underscore for the symbols of the
following objects in the command line.

@item -shared
Instructs the linker to build a shared object from the object
files rather than a normal executable image.

@item -soname name
Sets the "real name" of a shared object or library. For ELF
this will create the @code{SONAME} tag in the @code{.dynamic}
section.

@item -T script
Specifies a linker script, which defines the absolute
locations for every section. The syntax is very similar
to that used in GNU linker scripts.
Supported commands:
@itemize @minus
  @item ASSERT
  @item CONSTRUCTORS
  @item ENTRY
  @item EXTERN
  @item FILL
  @item INPUT
  @item GROUP
  @item OUTPUT_ARCH
  @item OUTPUT_FORMAT
  @item PROVIDE
  @item SEARCH_DIR
  @item VBCC_CONSTRUCTORS
  @item VBCC_CONSTRUCTORS_ELF
@end itemize
Supported functions:
@itemize @minus
  @item ADDR
  @item ALIGN
  @item KEEP
  @item LOADADDR
  @item MAX
  @item MIN
  @item SIZEOF
  @item SIZEOF_HEADERS
  @item SORT
@end itemize

@item -Ttext addr
Set the base address of the first section. It can be overridden by
a linker script.

@item -t
Trace the linker's file accesses.

@item -textbaserel
Allow base-relative access on code sections. Otherwise the
linker will display a warning.

@item -tos-flags value
Set the 32 bit flags field of the Atari TOS header to @code{value}.
All @option{-tos} options are only valid for the targets @code{ataritos} and
@code{aoutmint}.

@item -tos-fastload
Sets the fastload bit (0) in the TOS header.

@item -tos-fastram
Sets the fastload bit (1) in the TOS header.

@item -tos-fastalloc
Sets the fastload bit (2) in the TOS header.

@item -tos-private
Sets the flags in the TOS header to mark memory space as private.

@item -tos-global
Sets the flags in the TOS header to mark memory space as global (read/write
by any process).

@item -tos-super
Sets the flags in the TOS header to mark memory space as read-writeable by
processes in supervisor mode only.

@item -tos-readable
Sets the flags in the TOS header to mark memory space as read-only for other
processes.

@item -tos-textbased
Writes text-based (offset to program start) DRI symbols to a TOS executable,
like Devpac. Otherwise symbol offsets are based on the section they are
defined in.

@item -Ttext addr
Sets the start address of the first section, as long as it is not
overwritten by a linker script.

@item -u symbol
Marks symbol as undefined in the first section which was
found on the command line. This might trigger linking of
addtional modules from standard libraries.
This is equivalent to the linker script command EXTERN.

@item -V version
Minimum major version of shared object to be linked behind this option.

@item -v
Prints @command{vlink} version string, default library search path
and implemented target file formats.

@item -w
Suppress all warning messages.

@item -X
Discard local symbols in the input files that start with the
letters 'L' or 'l', or with a dot.

@item -x
Discard all local symbols in the input files.

@item -y symbol
Trace the manipulations inflicted on symbol.
@end table

@section Known Problems
@itemize @minus
  @item Neither shared objects nor dynamically linked executables can be
    generated for @code{a.out} format.
  @item The following options are not really supported:
    @option{-S}, @option{-X}, @option{-Bsymbolic}
  @item Source level debugging support is missing for some formats.
  @item Many linker script commands are still missing.
  @item Default linker scripts are mostly missing, so you need to provide
    your own script using the @option{-T} option.
  @item @code{PHDR} support for ELF is not perfect.
@end itemize

@section Credits
All those who wrote parts of the @command{vlink} distribution, made suggestions,
answered my questions, tested @command{vlink}, reported errors or were
otherwise involved in the development of @command{vlink} (in ascending
alphabetical order, probably not complete):
@itemize
  @item Karoly Balogh
  @item Volker Barthelmann
  @item Mikael Kalms
  @item Miro Kropacek
  @item Gunther Nikl
  @item J@"org Strohmayer
@end itemize

@section Error Messages
@enumerate
@item Out of memory
@item Unrecognized option '%s'
@item Unknown link mode: %s
@item Unknown argument for option -d: %c
@item Option '-%c' requires an argument
@item No input files
@item File \"%s\" has a read error
@item Cannot open \"%s\": No such file or directory
@item Invalid target format \"%s\"
@item Directory \"%s\" could not be examined
@item %s: File format not recognized
@item \"%s\" is already an executable file
@item %s: File format corrupted
@item %s (%s): Illegal relocation type %d at %s+%x
@item %s: Unexpected end of section %s in %s
@item %s: %s appeared twice in %s
@item %s: Misplaced %s in %s
@item %s: Symbol definition %s in %s uses unsupported type %d
@item %s: Global symbol %s from %s is already defined in %s
@item %s: Unresolved reference to symbol %s in %s uses unsupported type %d
@item %s (%s+0x%x): Reference to undefined symbol %s
@item Attributes of section %s were changed from %s in %s to %s in %s
@item %s: %s expected
@item %s (%s+0x%x): Illegal relative reference to %s+0x%llx
@item %s (%s+0x%x): %dbit %s reference to %s+0x%llx (value to write: 0x%llx) out of range
@item %s (%s+0x%x): Referenced absolute symbol %s=0x%llx + 0x%llx (value to write: 0x%llx) doesn't fit into %d bits
@item %s (%s+0x%x): Illegal relative reference to symbol %s
@item %s (%s+0x%x): Relative reference to relocatable symbol %s=0x%llx + 0x%llx (value to write: 0x%llx) doesn't fit into %d bits
@item Can't create output file %s
@item %s (%s+0x%x): Absolute reference to relocatable symbol %s=0x%llx + 0x%llx (value to write: 0x%llx) doesn't fit into %d bits
@item Error while writing to %s
@item Target %s: Unsupported relocation type %s (offset=%d, size=%d, mask=%llx) at %s+0x%x
@item Target %s: Can't reproduce symbol %s, which is a %s%s%s
@item Option '%s' requires an argument
@item %s (%s+0x%x): Calculated value 0x%llx doesn't fit into relocation type %s (offset=%d, size=%d, mask=0x%llx)
@item UNUSED
@item %s: Malformatted archive member %s
@item %s: Empty archive ignored
@item %s: %s doesn't support shared objects in library archives
@item %s: %s doesn't support executables in library archives
@item %s (%s): Illegal format / file corrupted
@item %s: Consistency check for archive member %s failed
@item %s: Invalid ELF section header index (%d) in %s
@item %s: ELF section header #%d has illegal offset in %s
@item %s: ELF section header string table has illegal type in %s", EF_ERROR,
@item %s: ELF section header string table has illegal offset in %s
@item %s: ELF program header table in %s was ignored
@item %s: ELF section header type %d in %s is not needed in relocatable objects
@item %s: Illegal section offset for %s in %s
@item %s: ELF %s table has illegal type in %s
@item %s: ELF %s table has illegal offset in %s
@item %s: %s in %s defines relocations relative to a non-existing section with index=%d
@item %s: Symbol %s, defined in %s, has an invalid reference to a non-existing section with index=%d
@item %s: Illegal symbol type %d for %s in %s
@item %s: Symbol %s has illegal binding type %d in %s
@item %s: Symbol %s in %s is multiply defined
@item %s: Merging a code section with name \"__MERGED\"
@item Relative references between %s section \"%s\" and %s section \"%s\" (%s) force a combination of the two
@item Can't define %s as ctors/dtors label. Symbol already exists.
@item %s: ELF section header type %d in %s is not needed in shared objects
@item %s: Endianess differs from previous objects
@item Target file format doesn't support relocatable objects
@item Predefined limits of destination memory region %s for section %s were exceeded (0x%llx)
@item Section %s(%s) was not recognized by target linker script
@item %s line %d: Unknown keyword <%s> ignored
@item %s line %d: '%c' expected
@item %s line %d: Absolute number expected
@item %s line %d: Keyword <%s> expected
@item %s line %d: GNU command <%s> ignored
@item %s line %d: Unknown memory region <%s>
@item %s line %d: Multiple constructor types in output file
@item %s line %d: Syntax error
@item %s line %d: Assertion failed: %s
@item %s line %d: SECTIONS block defined twice
@item %s line %d: Segment %s is closed and can't be reused
@item %s line %d: Address overrides specified %cMA memory region
@item %s line %d: Segment %s must include both, FILEHDR and PHDR
@item %s line %d: Missing argument
@item %s line %d: Undefined section: <%s>
@item %s line %d: Section %s was assigned to more than one PT_LOAD segment
@item First ELF segment (%s) doesn't contain first section (%s)
@item Intermediate uninitialized sections in ELF segment <%s> (first=<%s>, last=<%s>) will be turned into initialized
@item Section <%s> (0x%llx-0x%llx) conflicts with ELF segment <%s> (currently: 0x%llx-0x%llx)
@item %s: QMAGIC is deprecated and will no longer be supported
@item %s: a.out %s table has illegal offset or size in %s
@item %s: a.out %s table size in <%s> is not a multiple of %d
@item %s: a.out symbol name has illegal offset %ld in %s
@item %s: a.out symbol %s has illegal binding type %d in %s
@item %s: a.out relocations without an appropriate section in %s
@item %s: illegal a.out relocation in section %s of %s at offset 0x%08lx: <pcrel=%d len=%d ext=%d brel=%d jmptab=%d rel=%d copy=%d>
@item %s: illegal a.out external reference to symbol %s in %s, which is no external symbol
@item %s: illegal nlist type %lu in a.out relocation in section %s of %s at offset 0x%08lx
@item Target %s: Common symbol %s is unreferenced and will disappear
@item Target file format doesn't support executable files
@item %s: a.out relocation <pcrel=%d len=%d ext=%d brel=%d jmptab=%d rel=%d copy=%d> is treated as a normal relocation in section %s of %s at offset 0x%08lx
@item %s: size %d for a.out symbol %s in %s was ignored
@item Target %s: %s section must not be absent for a valid executable file", EF_FATAL,
@item Target %s: Section %s is overlapping %s
@item %s line %d: Illegal PHDR type: <%s>
@item %s line %d: <%s> behind SECTIONS ignored
@item %s line %d: Address symbol '.' invalid outside SECTIONS block
@item %s line %d: Reference to non-absolute symbol <%s> outside SECTIONS", EF_ERROR,
@item %s line %d: Division by zero
@item %s line %d: Unknown symbol or function: <%s>
@item %s line %d: No function-calls allowed here
@item %s line %d: Symbol <%s> is not yet assigned
@item %s line %d: Command <%s> not allowed outside SECTIONS block
@item %s line %d: Address symbol '.' cannot be provided
@item %s line %d: Symbol <%s> already defined
@item %s line %d: Only absolute expressions may be assigned outside SECTIONS block
@item %s line %d: Unknown PHDR: <%s>
@item %s (%s+0x%x): Cannot resolve reference to %s, because section %s was not recognized by the linker script
@item %s (%s): %d bits per byte are not supported
@item %s (%s): %d bytes per target-address are not supported
@item %s (%s): Relocation type %d (offset=%lld, bit-offset=%d bit-size=%d mask=0x%llx refering to symbol <%s> (type %d) is not supported
@item %s (%s): Symbol type %d for <%s> in section %s is not suported
@item %s (%s+0x%x): Cannot resolve %s reference to %s, because host section %s is invalid
@item %s: Malformatted ELF %s section in %s
@item %s: Ignoring junk at end of ELF %s section in %s
@item %s (%s+0x%x): Relocation based on missing %s section
@item %s (%s+0x%x): Base-relative reference to code section
@item Relocation table format not supported by selected output format - reverting to %s's standard
@item Unknown relocation table format '%s' ignored
@item Target %s: multiple small-data sections not allowed
@item .ctors/.dtors spread over multiple sections
@item Dynamic symbol reference not supported by target %s
@item %s: ELF symbol name has illegal offset 0x%lx in %s
@item %s: Unkown endianess defaults to %s-endian. Consider using -EB/-EL
@item Resetting the same attribute for section %s
@item Bad assignment after option '%s'
@end enumerate

@bye
